all right y'all motivated in y'all hand
tell y'all yesterday was pretty rough
day I came in there on seven o'clock
yesterday wanted to do a little bit of
training we went down to G $1.00 church
and we found 14 shanks in the common
areas now why would they do that
they want to get them quick why would
they want to get them quick it's what
self now I'm saying these shanks ain't
playin me these they make getting ready
to duel somebody to have anybody healed
scared yeah you scared I'm scared I'm
scared everybody should be scared
the inmates are getting brave they want
the challenge authority they want a run
smell state prison but we can't let them
run Smith state prison we run Smith
State period meaning on turn around
Lena Turner and we can't run away Oh
behind bars there are two sets of rules
the prison protocol and the convict code
to survive one code you may have to
break the other over a three-year span
National Geographic followed the lives
of inmates and officers in the state of
Georgia when a paramilitary system is up
against convicted felons investor
everybody I stay honest jeez man who's
really in charge
Jenna male this is the world a hard time
[Music]
would you end up working here at the
park you're sorry
can I get excited about this all right
when it came time for me to get out of
military and I went to come back and
Iraq and stuff like that you know and I
said what I'm gonna do
it's online know I might be a soldier I
love being a soldier then I came in here
and I call the tac squad these guys in
these black uniform marching down there
just say food our food rock this house
drop out military as I want so I'm gonna
have
four days a week lieutenant JB Davis
patrols the compound at Smith State
Prison is the second shift commander a
former soldier who embodies the
philosophy at the heart of Georgia's
correctional system paramilitary rigid
discipline the unwavering structure and
above all else maintaining control you
have to have some type of courage to
stand up and deal with him it but it may
they find out he's showing too much fear
they try to chase you up out of here we
used to spoon them maybe put up some of
them look you got to stop stop man stop
you got too much stuff going on with you
now you ain't got no ID card you ain't
got no string strings then you coming
through this gate for more D so holiday
I don't care what kind of inmates we get
in home care how balanced their we're
gonna maintain their control hey yo yo
but yo yo yo come in come in come in
we're guessing here you go this way I'm
gonna tell them what to do that's my
mission
maintaining control starts with the
little things like keeping in front
straight put their back on but only
shirt you cannot be bareback and when
the situation warrants control is more
forceful when we come in here we need to
ask you to run your mouth about that we
come into the tool to get to it but I
will tell you it's a daily reality here
understood
oh whoa because Smith is home to some of
the toughest inmates in the state it
sits in the small town of Glenville
Georgia a world unto itself in the deep
south
there are 1,500 inmates here almost all
are classified as closed security
the toughest to manage
[Music]
and lately the prison has been one of
the most dangerous in the state
there have been three murders here in
the last seven months alone some carried
out with homemade knives shanks you know
what going back you and I may have been
turned one came in failure
I need them shame oh five people come on
be in tune with their teeth you do
that's my mistake they can't protect us
and we know this you know what I mean
if you ain't got your knife you know
that's the only way you're gonna survive
because these young young kids and play
no games jungle man straight up
life is lived programming
the stretch of violence shows no signs
of letting up
and has both officers and inmates on
edge
[Music]
there's a battle a wall as what it is
World War 3 in the prison we fighting it
every day we on the front line right
there today Davis and his team are
ramping up their efforts in hopes of
quelling the tensions what thanks boo
right hey over
shakedowns have become commonplace here
and today they are headed out to another
dorm
or you say all the closed doors but
rather than finding a single shank we
can tie back the team uncovers the
makings of an arsenal what's up yeah
what you guys
they try to bed apart or make a weapon
that turns a fan stuff to make a weapon
that sort of fence down they'd sort of
wall level this apart anything they
could get to make a weapon out of them
make it they're going to fabricate these
there take a popsicle stick shopping it
down and make something out of the
sticky wood the weapon stash is an
alarming time reading better musical
make sure you got none no a sign of
things to come
then put it like these it's not going to
be stopped
you're as soon as you get if the weapons
out 100 multi-day design and that's what
you're feeling all right
[Music]
while the inmates are returning to their
cells across camp a unit k1 trouble is
brewing and the prison special forces
the cert team has been called a simple
cell flooding is escalating
[Applause]
all right everybody go with more than 50
inmates out of their cells the numbers
are against the six man response to him
there's only pair but 200 officers
versus 1500 inmates oh yeah if they all
got together believe me it's gonna get
ugly and the minute they get enough
boosts behind me I just hate let's just
go all out then we'll go one destitute
within sales now why we go up there
together brought wine no just hold it
down let it go for right now is go
mid-afternoon and already it's been a
long day of Smith when right next door
things take a turn for the worse
and Ketu a general alarm has sounded man
down a clash involving an officer and
now a fight has erupted
[Music]
[Applause]
for 10 minutes the balance of power is
in question before officers restore
order and the instigators are hauled out
everybody on earth is bound leave today
and mates try to take control of Dorma
smith tomorrow they will see the
consequences
[Music]
it's all about the control right now we
have the control in the overhead
we got them locked down we got them
isolated got the troublemakers that
started it all we got them locked down
and isolated so hopefully it stays far
for the remainder today
[Music]
at the morning after the fight in unit
k2 now the dorm is unlocked out the
ultimate step by a warden to restore
order in his institution anything you
lock up in a page a lock up anywhere
pretty soon is going to turn Wow
if I was MD I feel dangerous than me I
would I'd be a danger to me because I
love my freedom that's why I follow the
rules on the street because I love my
freedom and you keep a cat in a corner
so long when you keep this Tiger knives
and my racket and you know ahead you
gonna come about that coin though the
details of yesterday's fight are still
being investigated
one thing is clear inmates and officers
fought and Antonio German jumped into
the fray one day later he is
unapologetic if I do something wrong
because you got you got you got your
right to punish me for the first in that
in that coat but if you come in here
this turn it is make my time hard cuz
you had a bad day you're gonna have a
bad day every day you come in and dome
its attention together
you're looking at a do that you got a
life sentence under 15 20 years and you
go talk to them like a dog
you think I'm going to a heat whatever
you ask me to do
Sherman's choice to lash out hasn't been
the hole with new restrictions and
sanctions punishments that inmates know
well especially in Maslak Hassan Hawkins
Hawkins is a new arrival of Smith
getting us footing and adjusting to the
reality of daily life here
[Music]
[Applause]
I guess violins come those who search
for it or those who you know I'm saying
violate though
but at the same time you mind your
business state to yourself you know
worry about all that
I understand I try to associate myself
with people they're on my level I'm on
their level you know I'm saying I'm not
trying to be affiliated with nobody but
people that see the same views on life
you know
staying to yourself the key to keeping
out of trouble and something that's new
to Hassan Hawkins when I first got here
I would walk into the myth hall and it
was dude behind me and I told him I said
man I'm free you know it was like here's
the first day I walk through the mess
hall he was showing me where the men saw
lots of man I'm free man you know he
looked at me like he's are you free see
ya hey where the hell you been
I said I don't how fast about 70 he said
were you free you know
[Music]
three years ago we met Hassan Hawkins
for the first time at Georgia's newly
opened special management unit known
simply as hi max he had been here for
six months it was one of the worst
inmates in the entire state of Georgia
[Music]
I'm going to prison what made to be easy
you know I'm saying but you gotta
understand that I'm still a human being
and if you strip me of death man terror
and that all that I'm a human being
naturally oh my head like a melon
Hawkins entered the system when charges
that included aggravated sodomy with
little chance of ever getting out
and behind bars his actions chronic and
subordination attacking inmates and
attacking officers guaranteed some of
the hardest time the state had to offer
[Music]
violent acts that continued in the Himax
about licensing 40 Jesus when I get
frustrated and I take it out an awesome
because that's what you'll deal with me
you want to come here for eight hours to
make my time on I'm gonna make my eight
hours your drive and we're gonna see who
winning that battle right up I'm gonna
do what I want to do when I get ready to
do and I don't think it too much you can
do to stop you got also come to my door
he do something my trade
it's for it you know that it might drop
a piece of ran off the trail
he might say well you know saying I go
over to miss Holland issue a visa I
might not want you to booking this all
you should have dropped that piece of
bread and I might - wait you deserve all
the rest even is made to frame me if he
was bred to know it ain't working like
that I might not be in the mood for the
word like that
moving up a flat in one's age you can
put in fade on now without raise up on
called stiffen or install him in a fade
and it was my different I thought you
know
[Music]
for his behavior asana 23 hours on
lockdown limited movement and little
contact with officers or staff getting
out of isolation men making a choice toe
the line or escalate and face greater
control
now at Smith State Prison Antonio German
faces that same choice
he's at the beginning of his punishment
for fighting an officer and like the
Hassan Hawkins of old unrepentant if
you're not gonna respect me in my favor
I'm definitely expecting when you think
you're gonna have to face me
I demand the state I'm gonna give you
that respect so at that same so it would
be best to give you my respect you told
me what happened is Sunday can happen at
any moment you gotta understand it's
really not about about winning then it
keeps that point it's the balance okay
I'm gonna let you know this how you
wanna rock every time you deal with me I
can be their ass yeah I can get it as a
normal thing
[Music]
Smith state prison in southern Georgia
tensions remain high in the wake of a
fight between officers and inmates today
the prison special forces the cert team
are on the move again to investigate
another incident a clash between two
inmates we had an inmate was forced out
of the dhamma torii earlier around
countdown and may had some abrasions to
his facial area and according to medical
had a stab wound to his arm we're going
to go down to the dome Ettore now and
see if we can find a weapon or any blood
evidence see if we can come up with any
intelligence on on what happened and why
you got put out getting put on the door
is the way inmates force out those they
don't want
the outcast has handed their belongings
and literally shoved out the door but in
this case the victim was stabbed a sign
that more trouble could be coming out on
the scene lieutenant JB Davis has
started the investigation hey go ahead
and put your hand behind your back me
y'all moving y'all keep your hands
behind your back move straight in front
move it when I came in they say take
them down and shake them down just what
happened he gave me a little bit of
information and so based on the
information they gave me I know what I
was coming down here looking for will
you find it handy evidently somebody saw
us coming and throw all this stuff in
the garbage the search uncovers a stash
of shanks but no trace of blood they're
pretty clean
so there's probably another weapon
around is on you all you they probably
sold it somewhere out aren't they
because they'll be holding on to that
they could be trying to get rid of it as
we speak
yo Bellator he knows what happened but
um they they want to have it distills
the inmates property was packed up and
put outside the door
usually not happen this other inmates
have gotten together in the dormitory
and are forcing this inmate to take
protective custody or move out of the
donut
right now all we have is funny inmates
that may be involved sometimes once you
start investigating in there there's
actually more than that
that guy were tied into what we saw not
only that micros evening
while they're doing a search of the
dormitory we're going to do some quick
interviews of the inmate if anybody is
willing to talk to anybody knows
anything and go from there
90% of the inmates in here know who did
but they're not going to tell mattified
the inmates that was involved proper
stand right up in here while we're going
to shake down it's going to be always
something missed always some hidden they
find so many ways to hire stuff but if
we continuously do this when you have a
problem in a dorm they're kind of like
calm things down because they'll be like
where is the fear pressure get on with
all material y'all know what them focus
for the two of day if we start some
trouble they're going to come down and
shake us down and for the inmates that
really help contraband don't want to be
found
they're going to try to keep going quiet
that's what it's about you know this
keep it quiet keep the officers off our
back it takes time but the team's
persistence pays off upstairs they find
a vital clue
what in mid- to amaze you nothing will
get wood I need to find the two inmates
living as though the shirt is the
beginning of the trail one Davis hopes
leads to the attacker cool we're super
fun now there's Molly a garden tools
we're going to do that so Katya you want
to leave yummy yeah you want a legal
chopstick in blood it up though the Emmy
for t-shirt like we see something won't
stay in the dorm but they weren't
searching now they came later why tell
me straight to hell toaster
I'll tell you but B word up with them
come on I'm gonna forget who you are now
I'm coming back down again mean word up
I find anything different and what you
telling me right now so I'm sorry unique
now all right you surely don't have a
name I can't identify move on so we get
me and they have got it what was the
probability when they're just probably
right here just probably they come with
the evidence in hand the cert team makes
their next move
what that would mean
we found some bloody clothes and donut
or II found a couple weapons none that
we can actually say worth a weapon that
was involved so right now we're gonna go
talk to the hand made that was assaulted
and see if we came before he fell from
him and kind of verify or or disprove
what's being said in developed even in
prison incidents are investigated and
the cert officers are detective so sort
no Ganic ghost I look rough in the road
because I found a shirt in his room
that's how I know about rook their hope
is to connect the dots to find a link
between the victim the inmate with the
bloody shirt and hopefully the lead they
need to find the assailant
[Music]
as the cert investigation continues in
the segregation unit antonio german is
still marking his time awaiting his
punishment
it's one of the ways the system
exercises control and for some it could
be an opportunity to make yourself
better to follow the rules of the system
if you choose to make that change the
years 2008 the son Hawkins is in the
deepest hole in the state the Himax unit
and under the watchful eye of officials
like Rick Jacobs our Himax unit was
designed and built to house the worst
offender that we manage in the prison
system in Georgia you take the most
difficult to manage the most violent
towards others we bunch them all
together and attempted to manage them
and more under one roof this is the end
of the road in Georgia prison this is
the end of the road if you choose for it
to be high max maybe the end of the road
but the philosophy is at the core of
Georgia style of control punishment
means removing everything from an inmate
and then slowly rewarding behavior by
giving privileges back you know the
stick and the carrot is is the ODIs
behavioral modification system in the
world
[Music]
it's been used on people it's been used
on animals it's at the core of
everything we did your sister you're
welcome
their behavior dictates how far and fast
they move within the high maximum and if
they behave well they move if they
behave badly they stay in those most
restrictive housing units Harkins faces
a choice toe the line and get out or
keep fighting the system a game no
inmate can win
please miss their block this their block
but ain't nothing changing you're on
there
what sign she steal a lot instead you
come through you know this piece of
y'all what they call ya'll you stand on
all this concrete all day you know I'm
saying every day I do but you ain't
never touched no grass and no dirt you
know I'm dead it is I know crib you know
like being locked up gonna die okay
[Music]
it's been more than a week since the
fight between inmates and officers broke
out as Smith and for now at least
there's been no new violence
so today lieutenant Davison's team have
a new mission to root out the contraband
that was the source of the conflict in
the first place we looking for
cellphones rose homemade woofers they
have 24/7 to think of new ways to get
stuff inside this Institute
almost everyday work on the silver and
that's the that's that's what's so hard
believe so many it's coming to the
institution
it means I'll get the kill Toby
cellphone inmates are going another
inmates there and beat them almost to
death over a cell phone in any
institution globally in the state of
Georgia
you want to find stuff like this as hot
is any time stay right here while Davis
and my team take the inmate into custody
across camps cert is focusing on their
investigation into an inmate stabbing
they found the bloody shirt and the
victim is in custody but they still have
no leads on the attacker going down
they're returning to the scene of the
crime for another search in hopes of
recovering the weapon
yeah he was a big piece of aluminum he's
working on possibly be a weapon later
similarly is it so they started
sharpening their missile image and put a
blind eye on it downstairs they make
another find
homemade weapon as you can see has
pointed it's not completely finished a
lot of time to enemy they'll see is
common and they know that we fiction
shaped on the building we'll try to get
rid of you know stoplights a so their
work that way will be found their
position get charged whether they get
large one another right here same way as
I was telling you that's an l1 right
here you'll be fine three more sinks but
no blood none of them are the weapon
with the search leading to a dead end
the team heads back to see the victim
for another round of questioning what
exactly happened why did they speak to
them the altercations one thing just you
know fistfight that's one thing get
stuck that's it gets into a different
level dinner I got a dumbest we're a lot
better now for something that don't eat
involved so I got to clarify this
situation now
you know whoever stuck you I need to get
that guy out the dumb tool I got mostly
little details put together but I need
to get the gutter stuff where to stay it
gives us what you do know I can work off
of that we're about does he sleep when
we come to it think about my position in
this situation right now I've got I've
got a guy I've got a guy down there in
the dormitory that's using a shank to
stab you in arms you get you out of a
doumitt or for a pitty situation I've
got you down here in lockdown now if I
let you back out in population I'm
putting you at risk because he's still
out there he hasn't been found
he hasn't been brought up hearing been
locked down for what he did
I'm putting you and Jeff I can't do that
we know he was directly involved he's
our best source of information sometimes
they're willing to talk sometimes they
aren't they have a code to live by
inside the institution's just like we
have a code we can't reveal information
to the invasive and what we do a lot of
times they they're not supposed to
reveal any details about what they do to
us you change your mind
grab me a little letter put it in the
mailbox
you know you
[Music]
right now we're gonna have to hold him
in segregation until we find out who the
inmate was that assaulted him or until
we feel like the threat is over or if if
it's an ongoing threat then then we'll
have to see by sending him to another
institution so we're going to keep
digging see if we can pull up some video
off of the DOMA Torrey videotape and go
from there
[Music]
in the segregation unit at Smith State
Prison Antonio German is awaiting his
fate he broke a cardinal rule of doing
time and fought an officer when you get
in isolation they take all your province
and to give you a jumpsuit and a shirt
and cup of bread box cover t-shirts and
shoutings and basically it it's our time
in with this you know you know what's
eating out here not tonight
another thing no radios no newspapers no
phone calls get the windows painted out
you know four walls big that's it for
his actions
Germans penalty could be prolonged
segregation and loss of all privileges
it is a punishment though that comes
with a choice
a choice another inmate Hassan Hawkins
once faced I used to be in that frame of
mind
it's like making I also do what I want
to do you know the saying now I got to
do what the officers they do if I want
to stay in general population so you
know that's what it is not I had to
basically bring down from where I used
to be to where I am now
I had to make a 360 degree turn a lot of
people don't like to be controlled and I
was one of those people is there a
better way to control people
yes it's called finesse and I'm gonna
tell you somebody there specialized in
it the stealing Hall good morning to
look at those blockers right
got the best time
bring it up a little bit rather three
years ago
Hilton Hall was the warden at the main
intake prison for the state none simply
as Jackson you destroying off it pours
your shoes go hang those rings up
massive er this is where new inmates are
broken into the system and talkative
rules good morning
there's a lot tight little tighten up
you'll feet together your hands down by
your side and head knife to the front
he's also getting locked up
[Music]
the man no his business it is funny this
time he know his business yeah
who tell you his specials over so you
think you don't do that let me do that
he definitely woke me up and he'd take a
lot to wake fool look listen I old fool
as warden at Jackson calls
responsibilities extended beyond just
the main prison the Himax is also under
his command and back then that meant
overseeing Hassan Hawkins
mr. Hall came and talked to me and got
me down there and basically told me look
I was on you're digging yourself deeper
and deeper in the hole every day ah
we're gonna climb a little bit and
that'll did
all right here we come live huh
hi max was founded on an organizing
principle prove you can behave at one
level and you move on to the next it's
all part of George's version of
rehabilitation the carrot and the stick
every step that you did you know I'm
saying that you can taste more freedom
you can't make a person change just
being straight up with you the person
has to want to change there has to be
some kind of incentive there for that
person to want to change them in front
of situation where I came from and I
realized it so why not
if it wasn't for that man you say I
steer being that how amazing that's for
you
that's just straight up because didn't
nobody else want to take a chance
nobody everybody feel like okay you
better might that he must want to kill
off being kill hogs even killing the
limit so far they're going to proving
room
[Music]
Hawkins bought into the system and for
it he was rewarded today he has earned
his way out of the deepest hole in the
state and returned to general population
to the relative freedom at Smith I feel
great upon my feet
I'm we're on the big yard I took my
shoes off walk backwards on the ground
it's like you've been walking on this
concrete for for so long you know I'm
saying it's just a whole different smell
it's a different it's just a different
environment and I max you smell urine
and feces feelings and all the time when
somebody uses on it or somebody bagging
it up you know it's a different smell
[Music]
some of the do's and don'ts say I talk
live you don't say when I be talking
they say I talk loud that's the big
transition the communication standing
face to face with a person is just you
know saying cuz I'm used to holler milk
on the adult or through the crack in the
door
[Music]
at Smith state prisoner things seem to
be heating up again k dorm remains quiet
after the fight there but in
administration lieutenant JB Davis has
another challenge on his hands and is
gathering his team for response hey
y'all listen up
we're going down to g1 lieutenant my
fallen had a problem locking down g1 he
had the top of all guns brought down
there he deplored a couple of rounds
unto the wall boom boom there's been
making moves cause I guess there so he
wouldn't shoot and so it took him a
while to lock him down they wanted to
challenge him don't go and play with
these guy wings on then we're gonna do
this up y'all hit it
everybody hit it we in play it the
defiance of one inmate can quickly
spread but just as it hide in the fight
but you failed to close the door or you
fail when you fail the closed door so
today's mission is aimed at defusing the
situation and quickly removing any
inmates showing the slightest resistance
step inside yourself just inside
yourself but you don't want to step in
to pull them on out here got time for
this gives our house is our house they
live in here and they will follow the
rules and that's what it's about but the
troublemakers removed Davis and his team
starts shaking down the block turning
over every cell
checking hiding places on the yard and
it's not long before the search yields
results we've unaided with on small yoga
exercise Oh with its loud bar an
opponent a signal okay
their first shank is soon followed by
another
thanks you got some last night no I'm
taking turn back and another sell pills
are just the beginning
we'll make sure you do it at a knack up
this what you got caught
than a cellphone and something more they
say if you got a weapon an enemy they
don't pushed it back but his angel
[Music]
Thanks
infantile dead look like a fan while on
the side 105
when you find it it stays the same banks
legal yes indeed these are final exams
just stuff make them break they're going
to rob steal fight if they have a tool
in that hand
the search yields more than a dozen
shanks another small arsenal
across camp the prison has another
success in the battle for control
[Music]
in the case of the inmate stabbing when
a search has gotten there man
launched request Campbell is under
prison arrest
[Music]
for today order is maintained safety
reigns
but the new challenges at Smith are
always just around the corner we've got
to maintain control
yeah ma move down there City move down
no God I'm gonna put it to you for real
and it's on these and make what to take
over this place they could take over
this place this in this and hit I want
to go home I want to get up for that
keep it from half what you can make
really get jealous that we will take the
business can you we can be or kolobok
because they are number
you stay alert you'll survive in here
you know and that's being vigilant and
keeping a check on everything that's
around you you know you can't uh Nesta
mate these guys at any given time go
about nice well cut that in unit k1
another day begins for Hassan Hawkins
once one of the most feared inmates in
the state Hawkins is telling the line
what I used to do was easy what I'm
doing that is whole not allowing
somebody else to provoke me at that to
hurt him or kill that's the heart rather
it'd be awesome for prison
Dave happens is real very rude I don't
see in situations where sometimes I'll
be willing to pick up a knife and stick
some attitude this camp seems like a
particularly rough Campton for you to
try to walk the straight and narrow yes
this is this is definitely in the
special management unit Antonio Germans
time in the hole has come to an end but
rather than return to general population
Germans riding out to another prison
she fought the system
and as always the system one I had
yourself prologue you know you know he
would like opening my case like oh you
know I'm saying but I know I did they
see this right here
you know and to ourselves it'll be like
I want that you ready for the side - no
Sam I can see I'm in the right to
assault baby but the end of the day I am
I going to us
I didn't make the right choice at all
just havin fun but I shall be all in
fact if you change the German you can
hear it will be the house
[Laughter]